1. Frank Gehry, a celebrity architect, likes to cause aesthetic controversy, and his Stata Center at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) did the trick. Opened in 2004 and housing MIT’s computer-science and philosophy departments behind its facade of bizarre angles and windows, it has become a new landmark. But the building’s most radical innovation is on the inside. The entire structure was conceived with the nomadic lifestyles of modern students and faculty in mind. Stata says William Mitchell, a professor of architecture and computer science at MIT who worked with Mr. Gehry on the center’s design, was conceived as a new kind of “hybrid space.”//2. This is best seen in the building’s “student street,” an interior passage that twists and meanders through the complex and is open to the public 24 hours a day. It is dotted with nooks and crannies. Cafes and lounges are interspersed with work desks and whiteboards, and there is free Wi-Fi everywhere. Students, teachers, and visitors are cramming for exams, napping, instant-messaging, researching, reading, and discussing. No part of the student street is physically specialized for any of these activities. Instead, every bit of it can instantaneously become the venue for a seminar, a snack, or relaxation.//3. The fact that people are no longer tied to specific places for functions such as studying or learning, says Mr. Mitchell, means that there is “a huge drop in demand for traditional, private, enclosed spaces” such as offices or classrooms, and simultaneously “a huge rise in demand for semi-public spaces that can be informally appropriated to ad-hoc workspaces.” This shift, he thinks, amounts to the biggest change in architecture in this century. In the 20th century, architecture was about specialized structures- offices for working, cafeterias for eating, and so forth. This was necessary because workers needed to be near things such as landline phones, fax machines, and filling cabinets.//4. The new architecture, says Mr. Mitchell, will “make spaces intentionally multifunctional.” Architects are thinking about all in the service of human connections. Buildings will have much more varied shapes than before. For instance, people working on laptops and tablets find it comforting to have their backs to a wall, so hybrid spaces may become curvier, with more nooks, in order to maximize the surface area of their inner walls.//5. This “flexibility is what separates successful spaces and cities from unsuccessful ones,” says Anthony Townsend, an urban planner at the Institute for the Future. Almost any public space can assume some of these features. For example, a not-for-profit organization in New York has turned Bryant Park, a once-derelict but charming garden in front of the city’s public library, into a hybrid space popular with office workers. The park’s managers noticed that a lot of visitors were using mobile phones and laptops in the park, so they installed Wi-Fi and added some chairs with foldable lecture desks. The idea was not to distract people from the flowers but to let them customize their little bit of the park.//6. The academic name for such spaces is third places, a term originally coined by the sociologist Ray Oldenburg in his 1989 book . At the time, long before mobile technologies became widespread, Mr. Oldenburg wanted to distinguish between the sociological functions of people’s first places (their homes), their second places (offices), and the public spaces that serve as safe, neutral, and informal meeting points. As Mr. Oldenburg saw it, a good third place makes admission free or cheap - the price of a cup of coffee-, offers creature comforts, is within walking distance for a particular neighborhood, and draws a group of regulars.//7. Mr. Oldenburg’s thesis was that third places were in general decline. More and more people, especially in suburban societies such as America’s were moving only between their first and second places, making extra stops only at alienating and anonymous locations such as malls, which in Mr. Oldenburg’s opinion fail as third places. Society, Mr. Oldenburg feared, was at risk of coming unstuck without these venues for spreading ideas and forming bonds.//8.No sooner was the term coined than big business queued up to claim that it was building new third places. The most prominent was Starbucks, a chain of coffee houses that started in Seattle and is now hard to avoid anywhere. Starbucks admits that as it went global, it lost its ambiance of a “home away from home.” However, it has also spotted a new opportunity in catering to nomads. Its branches offer not only sofas but also desks with convenient electricity sockets. Bookshops are also offering “more coffee and crumbs,” as Mr. Oldenburg puts it, as are YMCAs and public libraries.//9.But do these oases for nomads actually play the social role of third places? James Katz at Rutgers University fears that cyber-nomads are “hollowing them out.” It is becoming commonplace for a cafe to be gull of people with headphones on, speaking on their mobile phones or laptops and hacking away at their keyboards, more engaged with their email inbox that with the people touching their elbows. These places are “physically inhabited but psychologically evacuated,” says Mr. Katz, which leaves people feeling “more isolated than they would be if the cafe were merely empty.”//10.Many cafe owners are trying to deal with this problem. Christopher Waters, the owner of the Nomad Cafe in Oakland, regularly hosts poetry readings, and he actually turns off the Wi-Fi at those times so that people mingle more. He is also planning to turn his cafe into an online social network so that patrons opening their browsers to connect encounter a welcome page that asks them to fill out a short profile and then see information about the people at the other tables.//11.As more third places pop up and spread, they also change entire cities. Just as buildings during the 20th century were specialized by function, towns were as well, says Mr. Mitchell. Suburbs were for living, downtowns for working, and other areas for playing. But urban nomads make districts, like buildings, multifunctional. Parts of town that were monocultures, he says, gradually become “fine-grained mixed-use neighborhoods” more akin in human terms to pre-industrial villages than to modern suburbs.
