Sun is the new tobacco: Why the young, especially, just can't quit 

1 In winter, if there's something special going on, Norah-Jean Howard, 19, heads to the tanning salon for a little color. In summer, though, Howard might join friends around the pool, or maybe at the trampoline in the backyard, to make sure she keeps that sun-kissed glow. The alternative ?pallor? is no alternative at all, and she doesn't spend a lot of time worrying about skin cancer.
 
2 Nevertheless, the Canadian Dermatology Association says, "No tan is a good tan," since all exposure to solar radiation?whether from the sun or a tanning lamp?damages the skin to some extent. 
To the sun-obsessed, you might as well be saying, "No air is good air." 
Young people, especially, have embraced tanning with a vengeance, heading to tanning salons and, in warm weather, soaking up the sun. 
Recently, the American Academy of Dermatology released a survey indicating 79 percent of youths between 12 and 17 know sun tanning can be dangerous. 
Furthermore, 81 percent recognize that sunburns during childhood up the risk of skin cancer, yet 60 percent said they burned in the previous summer. 
It gets worse: while more than a third of those surveyed said they knew someone who had skin cancer, almost half said people with tans look healthier.
3 Teenage boys are the worst offenders, with only 32 percent of those 15 to 17 reporting they're either very or somewhat careful under the sun. 
"This lax behavior could explain findings from a previous study published in the January 2003 issue of the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology in which older white men had a higher incidence of skin cancer," the academy reported. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States also confirms that white males have the highest rates of contracting skin cancer, with around 25 incidences of melanoma of the skin per 100,000 people in 2010.

4 North Americans are chasing UV radiation more vigorously than ever. 
According to Statistics Canada, Canadians last year made almost 2.5 million trips to Bermuda and the Caribbean for stays of one night or more in 2010, a searing 190 percent increase over the 860,000 visits made in 2000. 
Similarly, the US 5-billion-dollar tanning-salon market in North America has shown phenomenal growth, going from fewer than 10,000 outlets in the early 1990s to about 50,000 today. 
"Gold equals healthy and white equals ill," says Daniel Maes, vice president of global research and development for Estee Lauder in Melville, N.Y. 
"Nobody wants to deal with people who look ill. 
This is what pushes people to go lie down on a beach and get burned. 
They look around and everybody looks better than them."
5 Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer in Canada, accounting for one-third of all diagnoses of the disease, with 82,400 cases forecast for 2014 by the Canadian Cancer Society.
There are three kinds: basal, squamous and melanoma. 
Basal and squamous are less serious and far more common than melanoma, and will account for roughly 76,100 cases in 2014. 
They're usually treated without hospitalization. 
However, the incidence of melanoma, with 6,500 diagnoses and 1,050 deaths projected for 2014, has risen alarmingly?an average of 2.4 percent a year in men and 1.8 percent in women since 1992. 
Various cancer agencies agree: since sun exposure is linked to most skin cancers, reduced exposure to ultraviolet radiation would cut the number of new cancer cases to the same extent that quitting smoking cuts cancer in tobacco addicts.

6 Deborah Kellett grew up in Ontario and spent a lot of time sunning herself in cottage country north of Toronto. 
Kellett, 47, has olive-toned skin and generally didn't burn. 
Today, she lives in Bedford, Nova Scotia, and has had a year to think about her cancer. 
She had been keeping an eye on a spot on her back, just below her armpit, for a few years when her family physician noticed it had grown. 
Kellett was in to see a specialist within a week, and a week after that, the dermatologist used a local anesthetic and removed the growth, which was about the size of a baby fingernail. 
Her prognosis?like any melanoma caught early?is very good. 
"I always thought I was safe?I was proud of the way I would tan?but I basically tell people that it's not worth it," says Kellett. 

7 Sun suppresses the immune system. 
It works this way: dendritic cells with amoeba-like arms fight infections and are found in tissues throughout the body. 
They surround and swallow the infectious agent and deliver it to T cells, which trigger an all-out attack on the infection and also immunize the body against future assaults. 
The sun, however, "down regulates" dendritic cells, preventing their activation, says Bhagirath Singh, scientific director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity in London, Ontario. 
"Dendritic cells are really the central mechanism of the immune orchestra," says Singh. 
"They control how the immune system will mobilize."

8 Even when people put on sunscreen, they often don't put on enough to get the desired SPF rating. 
That's why Canadian dermatologists have upped their recommendation of SPF 15 to SPF 30, says Dr. Jason Rivers, a professor of dermatology at the University of British Columbia and former national director of the sun awareness program for the Canadian Dermatology Association. 
"You can lead by example as a parent, so early education is important," suggests Rivers. 
In fact, it's not all bad news. 
The tanning-bed industry is under mounting pressure. 
In March 2005, the World Health Organization?noting that more than two million cases of skin cancer, of which 132,000 are malignant melanomas, occur worldwide each year?urged regulators to restrict artificial tanning with UV light to those 18 and older. 
Along those lines, Health Canada has taken steps that will require manufactures to toughen warning labels on tanning equipment. 
As of 2013, six Canadian provinces have already banned young people under the ages 18 or 19 from using commercial indoor tanning services.

9 Under a scorching noonday sun in Toronto's Beaches neighborhood, Jason Remenda, 34, languidly pushes his 21-month-old son Jaydn on a swing. 
Remenda, a parts manager for a Japanese car manufacturer, has a rare day off. 
He's wearing shorts, a baseball cap and a thick gold chain around his neck. 
The only SPF lotion anywhere near him is on his son. 
It's his first time out this year, and he never uses sunscreen. 
Thoughts of skin cancer cross his mind only when someone asks him about it. 
"I'm getting up there in age," shrugs Remenda. 
"I'm going to die of some kind of cancer, right?"
10 A few feet away, lying in the sand along the north shore of Lake Ontario, Gillian Parker feels guilty for being caught out in the sun. 
The 24-year-old TV production assistant?fair-skinned, strawberry blond and freckled?usually doesn't sunbathe. 
Nevertheless, here she is, although she says she's watching the time carefully. 
"I already know that I'll probably get skin cancer," says Parker, explaining how she's burned throughout her life. 
Four years ago, she fell asleep for 45 minutes in the sun and ended up with blisters all over her chin. 
Her mother has already had skin cancer?twice. 
"That's why I feel I'm pretty much doomed."

11 It's the cry of a tan addict. 
Many of us, especially young people, just can't say no to the kiss of the sun, even though it could be the kiss of death.

