When Languages Die//// What exactly do we stand to lose when languages vanish? It has become a cliche to talk about a cure for cancer that may be found in the Amazon rain forest, perhaps from a medicinal plant known only to local shamans(Plotkin 1993). But pharmaceutical companies have spared no efforts to get at this knowledge and in many cases have exploited it to develop useful drugs. An estimated $85 billion in profits per year is made on medicines made from plants that were first known to indigenous peoples for their healing properties (Posey 1990).//// An astonishing 87 percent of the world's plant and animal species have not yet been identified, or classified by modern science(Hawksworth & Kalin-Arroyo 1995). Therefore, we need to look to indigenous cultures to fill in our vast knowledge gap about the natural world. But can they retain their knowledge in the face of global linguistic homogenization?//// Much -if not most- of what we know about the natural world lies completely outside of science textbooks, libraries, and databases, existing only in unwritten languages in people's memories. It is only one generation away from extinction and always in jeopardy of not being passed on. This immense knowledge base remains largely unexplored and uncataloged. We can only hope to access it if the people who possess and nurture it can be encouraged to continue to do so.//// If people feel their knowledge is worth keeping, they will keep it. If they are told, or come to believe, that it is useless in the modern knowledge is not always easily transferred from small, endangered languages to large, global ones. How can that be true if any idea is expressible in any language? Couldn't Solomon Islanders talk about the behavior patterns of fish in English just as easily as in Marovo, their native language? I argue that when small communities abandon their languages and switch to English or Spanish, there is also massive disruption of the transfer of traditional knowledge across generations. This arises in part from the way knowledge is packaged in a particular language.//// consider Western !Xoon, a small language of Namibia (the exclamation mark is a click sound). In !Xoon, clouds are called "rain houses." By learning the word for cloud, a !Xoon-speaking child automatically gets(for free) the extra information that clouds contain and are the source of rain. An English child learning the word cloud get no information about rain and has to learn on her own that rain comes from clouds.////// Languages package and structure knowledge in particular ways. You cannot merely substitute labels or names from another languages and hold onto all of the implicit, hidden knowledge that resides in a taxonomy, or naming system. Still, each language and indigenous people is unique, and language shift takes place at different speeds and under very different conditions. Can we then predict how much traditional knowledge will successfully be transferred and how much will be lost?//// Some scientists have tried to do just that. The Bari language(1500-2500 speakers) of Venezuela was studied by linguists who asked how much knowledge of the plant world was being lost and how much retained. The Bari live in a close relationship with the rainforest and have learned to use many of its plants for food, material goods, medicine, and construction of houses. One scientist found that the loss of Bari traditional knowledge corresponded with decreasing use of forest resources and a shift from the traditional hunter-gatherer lifestyle, along with a shift to speaking Spanish. His conservative estimate of the rate of knowledge loss should be a wake-up call to all: "I estimate that the real loss of ethnobotanical knowledge from one generation to the next may be on the order of 40 to 60 percent". (Lizarralde 2011)//// This is a dire scenario: Bari people who have limited connection with the forest have lost up to 45 percent of traditional plant names. Similar patterns of knowledge erosion may be obsreved among indigenous peoples all around the world as they undergo a cultural shift away from traditional lifestyles and languages.//// Some researchers offer hope for the persistence and resilience of very basic forms of traditional knowledge. A study by anthropologist Scott Atran(1998) tested residents of Michigan on their knowledge of local animals. He concluded that elements of folk knowledge persist even when people have been schooled in modern scientific classification.//// Though folk knowledge may persist in modern cultures, we are also losing traditional knowledge at an alarming rate. This loss is accompanied by a severe reduction in number of species and range of habitats. Perhaps future technologies hold enough promise that humanity will be able to survive without making use of this accumulated ecological knowledge. Perhaps we will grow plats in greenhouses and breed animals in laboratories and feed ourselves via genetic engineering. Perhaps there are no new medicines to be found in the rain forests. All such arguments appeal to ignorance: we do not know what we stand to lose as languages and technologies vanish because much or even most of it remains undocumented. So it is a gamble to think that we will never use it in the future. Do we really want to place so much trust in future science and pay so little attention to our inherited science?//////
